The Shapefile in fact consists of several files: in addition to one file with the actual geometry data, another file for defining the coordinate reference system is needed, as well as a file for defining the attributes and a file to index the geometries. This makes operating Shapefiles slightly clunky and confusing. However, Shapefile has been around for so long that any GIS software supports handling it.
	
The shapefile is BY FAR the most common geospatial file type you’ll encounter. All commercial and open source accept shapefile as a GIS format. It’s so ubiquitous that it’s become the industry standard.

But you’ll need a complete set of three files that are mandatory to make up a shapefile. The three required files are:

  SHP is the feature geometry.
  SHX is the shape index position.
  DBF is the attribute data.
You can optionally include these files but are not completely necessary.

  PRJ is the projection system metadata.
  XML is the associated metadata.
  SBN is the spatial index for optimizing queries.
  SBX optimizes loading times.

GeoPackage was first developed by Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 5 years ago, making it the official alternative for Shapefile. It is a subset of SQLite, which in turn is a lighweight SQL implementation designed for stand-alone databases. Similar to GeoJSON, this makes GeoPackage highly compatible by design, and accessible by non-GIS software as well.
GeoJSON is a subset of JSON (JavaScript object notation). It was developed 10 years ago by a group of enthusiastic GIS developers. The core idea is to provide a specification for encoding geospatial data while remaining decodable by any JSON decoder. The GeoJSON format is mostly for web-based mapping. GeoJSON stores coordinates as text in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) form. This includes vector points, lines and polygons as well as tabular information.

GeoJSON store objects within curly braces {} and in general have less markup overhead (compared to GML). GeoJSON has straightforward syntax that you can modify in any text editor.

Webmaps browsers understand JavaScript so by default GeoJSON is a common web format. But JavaScript only understands binary objects. Fortunately, JavaScript can convert JSON to binary.
